good evening my journey to this stage
began when I came to America at the age
of 17
you see I'm one of the 84 million
Americans who are immigrants or children
of immigrants each of us has a dream
when we come here a dream that usually
has to be rewritten and always has to be
repurposed I was one of the lucky ones
my revised dream led me to the work I do
today training immigrants to run for
public office and leading a movement for
inclusive democracy but I don't want you
to think it was a cakewalk that America
opened its arms wide and welcomed me
it's still not doing that and I've
learned a few lessons along the way that
I wanted to share with you because I
think that together we can make American
democracy better and stronger I was born
in India the world's largest democracy
and when I was 4 my family moved to
Belize the world's smallest democracy
perhaps and at the age of 17 I moved to
the United States the world's greatest
democracy I came because I wanted to
study English literature you see as a
child I buried my nose in books and I
thought why not make a living doing that
as an adult but after I graduated from
college and got a graduate degree I
found myself moving from one less ideal
job to another maybe it was the optimism
that I had about America that made me
take a while to understand that things
were not going to change the door that I
thought was open was actually just
slightly ajar this door of America that
would open wide if you had the right
name the right skin color the right
networks but could just slam in your
face if you had the wrong religion the
wrong immigration status
the wrong skin color and I just couldn't
accept that so I started a career as a
social entrepreneur starting an
organization for young people like
myself I was young at the time that I
started it who traced their heritage to
the Indian subcontinent in that work I
became an advocate for South Asians and
other immigrants I lobbied members of
Congress on policy issues I volunteered
on Election Day to do exit polling but I
couldn't vote and I couldn't run for
office so in 2000 when it was announced
that the citizenship application fee was
going to more than double from ninety
five dollars to two hundred and twenty
five dollars I decided it was time to
apply before I could no longer afford it
I filled out a long application
answering questions about my current and
my past affiliations and once the
application was submitted there were
fingerprints to be taken a test to study
for endless hours of waiting in line you
might call it extreme vetting and then
in December of 2000 I joined hundreds of
other immigrants in a hall in Brooklyn
where we pledged our loyalty to a
country that we had long considered home
my journey from international student to
American citizen took 16 years a short
timeline when you compare it to other
immigrant stories and soon after I had
taken that formal step to becoming an
American the attacks of September 11
2001 changed the immigration landscape
for decades to come my City New York
City was reeling and healing and in the
midst of it we were in an election cycle
two things happened as we coped with
loss and recovery in New York City
voters elected Michael Bloomberg mayor
of New York City
we also adopted by ballot referendum the
office of immigrant affairs for the city
of New York five months after that
election the newly elected mayor
appointed me the first Commissioner of
immigrant Affairs for this newly
established office I want you to come
back to that time I was a young
immigrant woman from Belize I had
basically floundered in various jobs in
America before I started a
community-based organization in a church
basement in Queens the attacks of
September 11th sent shockwaves through
my community people who were members of
my family young people I had worked with
were experiencing harassment at schools
at workplaces and in airports and now I
was going to represent their concerns in
government no job felt more perfect for
me and here are two things I learned
when I became Commissioner first
well-meaning New Yorkers who were in
city government holding government
positions had no idea how scared
immigrants were of law enforcement most
of us don't really know the difference
do we between a sheriff and local police
and the FBI and most of us when we see
someone in uniform going through our
neighborhoods feel curiosity if not
concern so if you're an undocumented
parent every day when you say goodbye
your child send them off to school and
go to work you don't know what the
chances are that you're going to see
them at the end of the day because a
raid at your workplace a chance
encounter with local police could change
the course of your life forever the
second thing I learned is that when
people like me who understood that fear
who had learned a new language who had
navigated new systems when people like
us or sitting at the table
we advocated for our community's needs
in a way that no one else could or would
I understood what that feeling of fear
was like people in my family were
experiencing it young people I had
worked with were being harassed not just
by classmates but also by their teachers
my husband then boyfriend thought twice
before he put a backpack on or grew a
beard because he traveled so much what I
learned in 2001 was that my vote
mattered but that my voice and vantage
point also mattered and it's these three
things
immigrants votes voices and vantage
points that I think can help make our
democracy stronger we actually have the
power to change the outcome of elections
to introduce new issues into the policy
debate and to change the face of the
pale male stale leadership that we have
in our country today so how do we do
that well let's talk first about votes
it will come as no surprise to you that
the majority of voters in America are
white but it might surprise you to know
that one in three voters are black
Latino or Asian but here's the thing it
doesn't just matter who can vote it
matters who does vote so in 2012 half of
the Latino and Asian American voters did
not vote and these votes matter not just
in presidential elections they matter in
local and state elections in 2015
land deep the eldest son of political
refugees from Vietnam ran for a seat in
the San Jose City Council he lost that
election by 13 votes this year he dusted
off those campaign shoes and went back
to run for that seat and this time he
won by 12 votes every one of our votes
matters
and when people like LAN are sitting at
the policy table they can make a
difference we need those voices we need
those voices in part because American
leadership does not look like America's
residence there are over 500,000 local
and state offices in America fewer than
2% of those offices are held by Asian
Americans or Latinos the two largest
immigrant groups in our country in the
city of Yakima Washington were 49% of
the population is Latino there has never
been a Latino on the city council until
this year three newly elected Latinas
joined the Yakima City Council in 2016
one of them is Carmen Mendez she is a
first-generation college student she
grew up partly in Colima Mexico and
partly in Yakima Washington she's a
single mother a community advocate her
voice on the Yakima City Council is
advocating on behalf of the Latino
community and of all Yakima residents
and she's a role model for her daughter
and other Latinas but the third most
untapped resource in American democracy
is the vantage point that immigrants
bring we have fought to be here we have
come for economic and educational
opportunity we have come for political
and religious freedom we have come in
the pursuit of love that dedication that
commitment to America we also bring to
public service people like Athena Salman
who just last week won the primary for a
seat in the Arizona State House Athena's
father grew up in the West Bank and
moved to Chicago where he met her mother
her mother is part Italian part Mexican
and part German together they moved to
Arizona and built a life
Athena when she gets to the State House
is going to fight for things like
education funding that will help give
families like her
a leg up so they can achieve the
financial stability that we all are
looking for immigrants votes voices and
vantage points are what we all need to
work to include in American democracy
it's not just my work it's also yours
and it's not gonna be easy we never know
what putting a new factor into an
equation will do and it's a little scary
you're scared that I'm gonna take away
your place at the table and I'm scared
that I'm never gonna get a place at the
table and we're all scared that we're
gonna lose this country that we know and
love I'm scared you're gonna take it
away from me
and you're scared I'm gonna take it away
from you look it's been a rough election
year a reminder that people with my
immigration history could be removed at
the whim of a leader but I have fought
to be in this country and I continue to
do so every day so my optimism never
wavers because I know that there are
millions of immigrants just like me in
front of me behind me and all around me
it's our country - thank you